mind your decisions i'm presh tallwalker
a b c d is a quadrilateral
point o is alongside a d and is the
center of a semi-circle
that is tangent to sides a b b c and c
d if a b is equal to 9
c d is equal to 16 and a 0
is equal to od what is the length of a d
pause the video if you'd like to give
this problem a try
and when you're ready keep watching to
learn how to solve this problem
[Music]
to solve this problem we'll use the
principle of equal tangence to a circle
suppose p is a circle and a is a point
exterior to the circle
if a b and ac are exterior tangents
we will show that a b is equal to ac
to do this construct radii pb and pc
from here we will construct two
congruent right triangles
it will then be easy to show that the
length of a b
is equal to the length of ac thus
a b is equal to ac
now let's solve the problem suppose e
is the point of tangency along a b
then the radius o e will be
perpendicular to a b
and suppose it has a length equal to r
let f be the point of tangency along c d
the radius o f will be perpendicular to
c d
and will have the same length equal to
the radius of the semicircle
since ao is equal to od triangle aeo
is congruent to triangle dfo thus
if ae has a length equal to x df
will have a length equal to the same
value of x
we can now set up a plan of attack to
solve the problem
we want to calculate the value of r
squared plus x squared
if we do that we will get the value of
ao squared and we will also get the
value of od squared
then ad is equal to ao plus od
so let's go and calculate the value of r
squared plus x squared
it will take many steps to get started
recall that a b has a length equal to
nine
thus e b will have a length equal to 9
minus x
then recall that cd has a length equal
to 16
so cf will have a length equal to 16
minus x
we will then use the principle of equal
tangence suppose g
is the point of tangency along bc
then we will have that b e is equal to
bg
so bg is equal to 9 minus x
we will also have that cf is equal to cg
so cg is equal to 16 minus x
from here we will construct og which is
a radius of the semicircle
we will then construct ob and we will
also construct
oc we now have one pair
of right triangles that are congruent we
then have another pair of right
triangles that are congruent
and we have a third pair of right
triangles that are congruent to each
other
now let's just focus on the
quadrilateral and some of the angles
let's suppose that aoe has a value equal
to theta
the corresponding angle in the other
blue triangle will also be equal to
theta
in the two purple triangles let's
suppose each of these angles is equal to
alpha
and then in the two green triangles
let's suppose each of these angles is
equal to beta
since ad is a straight line we will have
two theta
plus two alpha plus 2 beta is equal to
180 degrees
if we divide both sides of this equation
by 2 we get
theta plus alpha plus beta is equal to
90 degrees
in other words alpha plus beta
and theta are complementary
so we focus on this right triangle where
one angle
is equal to theta another angle is a
right angle
the remaining angle must be equal to
alpha plus beta
we then have r over x is equal to the
tangent
of the quantity alpha plus beta
we can use the tangent sum formula to
get the following equation
from here we'll look at this purple
triangle to get the value of tangent of
alpha
it'll be equal to 9 minus x all over r
in the green triangle we can get the
tangent of beta
is equal to 16 minus x all over r
we thus focus on these equations and
we'll simplify them
we'll substitute in for tangent of alpha
and tangent of beta
we then simplify this fraction we'll
multiply the numerator and denominator
by r squared
and then we'll continue to simplify
we simplify the numerator then we can
cancel out the r
terms on both sides of this equation
from here we will cross multiply
then we will continue to simplify
the 25x terms cancel out and we group
the x squared terms
so we get r squared plus x squared is
equal to 144
which is equal to 12 squared
we thus have solved for the value of r
squared plus
x squared and that's exactly equal to ao
squared and exactly equal to od squared
thus ao is equal to od is equal to 12
and ad is equal to al plus od
which is equal to 24 and that's our
answer
now you might be wondering if you could
solve for the value of
r or the value of x the answer is
no the reason is this diagram
actually corresponds to a family of
different quadrilaterals
as i will show you in the following
animations
while we cannot solve for the value of r
or x
we can see that in all of these
quadrilaterals
we have the same constant distance of a
d
and i think that's quite fascinating
thanks for making us one of the best
communities on youtube
see you next episode of mind your
decisions where we solve the world's
problems
one video at a time